---
title: "RECs cannot be used to back claims of 100% renewable energy"
date: 2021-03-01
modified: 2021-03-01
draft: false
tags: ["Reports", "IT Energy", "Data Center Energy", "Renewables Transition"]
summary: "Most data center sustainability strategies still focus on renewable 
energy certificates (RECs). RECs are now considered low quality products because 
they cannot credibly be used to back claims of 100% renewable energy use"
url: recs-cannot-be-used-to-back-claims-of-100-renewable-energy
---

In addition to starting my new company – [Console](https://console.dev/), a
weekly newsletter of the best tools for developers – I am also a Research
Affiliate at [Uptime Institute](https://uptimeinstitute.com/). Uptime Institute
is an independent advisory organisation focused on efficiency and reliability of
critical infrastructure, particularly IT and data centers.

Last year, I wrote about [data center claims of using 100% renewable
energy](https://davidmytton.blog/how-can-data-centers-use-100-renewable-electricity/) when
we haven’t fully decarbonised the electricity grid yet. [My first
report](https://uptimeinstitute.com/resources/asset/renewable-energy-for-data-centers) for
Uptime Institute is a more detailed look at that topic.

The report is [available for free on the Uptime Institute
website](https://uptimeinstitute.com/resources/asset/renewable-energy-for-data-centers).
The summary and key findings are below:

## Executive summary

Data center energy consumption and claims of 100% renewable energy use are
receiving ever more attention from the media, legislators, and customers. The
tech industry has made considerable effort to improve energy efficiency and is
the largest purchaser of renewable energy. Even so, most data center
sustainability strategies still focus on renewable energy certificates (RECs).
RECs are now considered low quality products because they cannot credibly be
used to back claims of 100% renewable energy use. To avoid accusations of
greenwashing, data center operators must consider investing in a portfolio of
renewable energy products. RECs may play a part, but power purchase agreements
(PPAs) are becoming more popular, even though there can be financial risks
involved. Further, matching energy consumption with equivalent renewable energy
purchasing on an annual basis is not enough to reach the goal of decarbonizing
the electricity grid. In the long term, all data center demand ― 100% ― must be
supplied by 100% renewable energy, 100% of the time. This will prove
challenging.

## Key findings

- Carbon emissions reporting is becoming more widespread. Reporting is
  voluntary in most jurisdictions, but mandatory international sustainability
  reporting standards are under discussion. Large corporations, such as Apple
  and Microsoft, now require carbon and sustainability reporting for all their
  suppliers. Organizations that are not tracking emissions may have to invest
  significant resources to catch up should reporting become required.
- Operators with the most sophisticated sustainability strategies have been
  expanding their renewable energy portfolios with large PPA contracts. Widely
  used RECs are likely to be dismissed as greenwashing if they are the main or
  only component of a renewable or low-carbon energy strategy. The low cost of
  RECs relative to the overall cost of electricity increases this risk.
- Operators should favor the purchase of direct PPAs (which guarantee physical
  delivery of electricity on the local grid) where possible, or
  virtual/financial PPAs (which do not provide physical delivery of
  electricity) if not. Purchasers should ensure they fully understand the
  contract terms, particularly with regard to pricing, to mitigate financial
  risk.
- As an alternative to PPAs, operators should consider retail or “green
  tariff” renewable energy contracts offered by energy services companies and
  utilities, sometimes in conjunction with a renewable energy developer. These
  contracts have a higher (financial) safety profile, because they have
  shorter terms and the renewable energy developer or energy retailer carries
  most of the financial risk.
- The 100% renewable energy use claim made by many data center and
  infrastructure operators can be misleading because it usually refers to the
  annual matching of renewable energy bought to equal the energy used.
  However, the power grid that they use carries electricity generated by many
  different fuels, the proportion of which shifts over time and with region.
  Over the coming years, operators should start planning to match electricity
  generated by renewable resources on an hourly basis, with detailed reporting
  of the electricity’s source. Where this is not supported by energy
  suppliers, operators should pressure suppliers to provide the necessary
  data.
- Although large-scale energy storage technology is still immature, new data
  center projects are starting to combine new renewable energy generation with
  large-scale battery storage. This allows the charging of batteries when
  renewable energy is available, then a switch to batteries when it is not.
  Large-scale, battery-based energy storage is being tested in some new data
  centers today; more widespread use may be an important component of future
  low-carbon/sustainable data center designs.
- Customer demand for renewably powered data centers is increasing. Requests
  for proposals for new contracts may now include detailed questions about
  data center sustainability. Customers are also becoming more sophisticated
  (and demanding) about their understanding of offsets, RECs and PPAs.

[Access the full report on the Uptime Institute
website](https://uptimeinstitute.com/resources/asset/renewable-energy-for-data-centers).
