---
title: "My favourite books of 2019"
date: 2020-01-08
modified: 2020-01-08
draft: false
tags: ["Favourite Books", "Reading"]
summary: "In 2019 I read 66 books. Here are the ones I rated 5 stars."
url: my-favourite-books-of-2019
---

In 2019 I read 66 books (with an average length of 289 pages). I track all the
books I read on [my reading list](https://davidmytton.blog/reading/). Here are
the ones I recommend:

## Fiction

- Exhalation, Ted Chiang
- Flowers for Algernon, Daniel Keyes
- His Dark Materials 1: Northern Lights, Philip Pullman
- His Dark Materials 2: Subtle Knife, Philip Pullman
- His Dark Materials 3: Amber Spyglass, Philip Pullman
- The Course of Love, Alain de Botton
- The Remains of the Day, Kazuo Ishiguro

## Non-fiction

### Sustainable Energy – without the hot air, David J.C. MacKay

Despite the well-structured approach to describing the problem, the outlook for
sustainable energy is not a positive one. This book explains why renewables will
never be able to provide 100% of the energy in the UK unless we deploy
country-scale facilities – something I doubt will ever happen. This is a good
example of how to walk through a difficult topic so that it is accessible for
non-specialists (particularly politicians) but still offer scientific detail if
the reader wishes.

This book was published 10+ years ago. We have known about the problems of
sustainable energy and climate change for decades. We have also known about the
solutions, and yet whilst have made good progress (e.g. [almost 40% renewables
in the UK electricity generation sector in
2019](https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/853598/Renewables_Q3_2019.pdf)),
we haven’t made sufficient progress.

### The Social Contract, Jean-Jacques Rousseau

The UK has had some kind of election major every year for the last 5 years and
every time the “wrong” party wins, I find the inevitable protests amusing. I
have nothing against protests per se, when they are reasonable and targeted at
specific causes, but I find protests against legitimate, democratic votes to be
absurd. You might not agree with the result but to use your right to protest
against the legitimate outcome of the right to vote makes no sense at all.

Although written several hundred years ago, The Social Contract stands up even
in 2019, perhaps even more so with hashtags like #notmygovernment. My advice to
those protesters would be to read The Social Contract. Your right to protest is
only available because of the surrender of certain other freedoms by being a
member of a democratic society. If you are protesting the very basis of that
society – the outcome of a vote – then you are essentially protesting your right
to vote.

### Steering the Craft: A Twenty-First-Century Guide to Sailing the Sea of Story, Ursula K. Le Guin

Supported by great examples and clear tips, Le Guin provides the core
foundations for fiction writing, plus a few hints for narrative non-fiction. The
exercises are fun and relevant, and they make you think about the points you
just read. My favourite tips were around creating memorable character names and
how it’s always a good idea to throw away the first 3 pages of anything (3
paragraphs for shorter works). I look forward to trying these!

### Environmental Economics: A Very Short Introduction, Stephen Smith

It’s all very well saying we want zero pollution and to have a perfect planet,
but that isn’t realistic and indeed isn’t possible if human civilisation is to
exist at all. This is a good introduction to how to think about the environment
in pragmatic manner, using real world economic concepts to understand how to
make the best decisions with the appropriate tradeoffs.

I would have liked to see a few more numbers or basic models to back up some of
the positions taken particularly in the final chapter related to the costs of
climate change. However, I found the discussions around incentives, particularly
carbon taxes vs trading, to be quite enlightening.

### The Absent Superpower: The Shale Revolution and a World Without America, Peter Zeihan

The first part of this book is about shale – what it is, how it works and what
the history is. It’s written in a somewhat technical but still easy to
understand way, is mostly neutral but is definitely on the positive side of the
technology and its benefits (the Appendix covers the negatives and counters to
them). This is interesting, but not revolutionary. What it does do is set up the
rest of the book.

The first chapter of the second part is an amazingly concise yet comprehensive
discussion and analysis of modern history leading into the geo-strategic
position of all the major countries as of 2016. If you read nothing else, this
chapter is worth the full 5 stars. It’s a great explanation of why we are where
we are (as of 2016, when the book was written).

The rest of the book is a prediction of what is going to happen as the US
becomes less interested in being the “world police” and starts supplying all of
its own energy (oil/natgas) needs. Regardless of how much you buy into the
predictions, the narrative is compelling reading and helps understand some of
the more unusual aspects of activity by certain countries e.g. why China is
focused on coal power generation vs renewables.

As the chapters progressed, I found they become more and more premised on
earlier assumptions which if a few key things fail to materialise, a good half
of the book is wrong. The author says this is not supposed to be a detailed
prediction, but does make some very detailed predictions. In that sense, I found
it to be somewhat incredible.

Nonetheless, it is an important thought experiment and is based in a good degree
of fact regarding state positions (both public, and what they are doing).
Certain things the author predicted e.g. trouble caused by Iran in the shipping
lanes of the Strait of Hormuz, have started to happen.

Despite not believing most of the predictions, I still found this a compelling
“what if” discussion that really highlights how our entire global stability is
built on oil. That is not a good place to be.

### Energy: A Beginner’s Guide, Vaclav Smil

I found this to be a good introduction to the concept of “energy” and the
historical changes of how energy is used in society. A large part of the book is
dedicated to that history and the biological processes that involve energy. Only
a small part considers how we might move away from fossil-fuel based sources of
energy and what the future of energy will be.

It’s not supposed be in depth in any area so whilst I would have liked more on
that topic, there are plenty of other books which can provide in-depth
discussions of areas of particular interest surfaced by this book. Indeed, the
end of the book has a very nice, short bibliography of further reading specific
to each chapter.

### Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity and Poverty, Daron Acemoğlu,  James A. Robinson

There are many sophisticated theories for why certain countries are poorer than
others but given the broad distribution of geography and history, none actually
stand up to scrutiny.

If the answer is geography, why the difference between Mexico and USA? If the
answer is common history then why North and South Korea? If the answer is the
automatic effects of post-colonialism, why Botswana vs Zimbabwe?

The answer, according to this book, is to do with the type of economic and
political institutions. Not one or the other, but both are crucial to sustained
growth and a high quality of living for citizens.

Whilst I think more pages could have been dedicated to types of government (e.g.
various forms of capitalism and socialism), the idea that strong property rights
and freedom of markets are necessary (but not sufficient) still comes through
very clearly.

A very interesting read, especially with the ending thoughts on foreign aid and
the importance of focusing on the right areas when considering how to encourage
change as part of foreign policy. There is a lot of wasted time and money that
could otherwise be avoided if the lessons of history were applied. This book
does a good job at explaining them.

### World Order: Reflections on the Character of Nations and the Course of History, Henry Kissinger

Kissinger provides an excellent guide to the current state of world order and
how states interact with each other. He includes the necessary historical
context for the development of all major societies that have a key role on the
world stage, explaining how they interact and offering a commentary on the
causes of key events. He has particular insight into the period where he was
directly involved with key foreign policy decisions, particularly around the
Middle East and China.

Reading this in 2019, it is amazing how much of the political challenges we face
today were predicted in the chapter on technological change. This is especially
the case when it comes to the advances of technology on elections and policy
making, then how they transpired into Brexit and Trump.

Kissinger barely needs to provide an updated volume because everything he
discussed turned out to be correct, but it would still be fascinating to read an
up to date analysis and how he thinks we should proceed into the future.

### The Limits to Growth: A Report for the Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind, Donella H. Meadows,  Dennis L. Meadows, Jørgen Randers, William W. Behrens III

Although completely out of date, there are several key principles explained in
this book that are vital to understand, and somewhat unintuitive. Exponential
growth is a well known confounder when it comes to what one might normally
expect, but combined with modelling potential productivity improvements due to
technology and what that does (or doesn’t do) to the ultimate outcome, this book
does a great job at explaining the challenges we face as a civilisation.

Regardless of the timeline of how things have actually developed, the model is
still relevant. Indeed, the narrative specifically says that the model is not
supposed to be predictive and the dates are just indicative. The direction is
accurate though, so this serves to illustrate how we should be thinking about
what are inevitable problems of the future.

My biggest criticism of the equilibrium state is what might be necessary to
reach it. The book does a good job at being non-partisan but to me is clearly
advocating for a socialist / centrally controlled solution. It’s reasonable to
initially think that is the only way to get everyone aligned and working towards
the same goal, but anyone who knows anything about history will know that
socialism simply doesn’t work, it has never worked and will never work. [The
Road to
Serfdom](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/299215.The_Road_to_Serfdom) describes
this clearly.

That leaves us with the challenge of how to bring about the same result through
pragmatic, capitalist means. This is all about incentives. Government certainly
has a role here and we are already seeing how well that works when it comes to
energy markets and renewables. The question is: is it soon enough and how do we
speed things up? That’s where global agreement will be needed – common
light-touch intervention to stimulate innovation and market based solutions that
don’t then result in loss of freedom. How we achieve this is the key policy
question of the next decade.

### On the Shortness of Life, Seneca

Clear, simple and still relevant. Not much else to say really – this is classic
philosophy and very much matches how I try and think about the world. The key
principle is explained on the first page:

> It is not that we have a short time to live, but that we waste a lot of it.
> Life is long enough, and a sufficiently generous amount has been given to us
> for the highest achievements if it were all well invested.

### In Praise of Shadows, Jun’ichirō Tanizaki

The flow through so many topics is impressive in how smoothly Tanizaki covers so
many seemingly different but completely relevant areas. It reminds me of Lost
Japan by Alex Kerr in lamenting some of the past but still seeing how it could
be reimagined and appreciated in the present, even if the present of this book
is now many years in the past.

I’m not sure about his opinion that the West doesn’t really understand the dark.
Shadows and darkness are what I associate most with Victorian London, especially
with the smog and other effects of the Industrial Revolution.

I also think cities like London and Edinburgh are faring much better when it
comes to architectural conservatism as well – one only has to visit the vast
areas of modern Tokyo and Kyoto to understand the contrast the shrinking of the
more traditional quarters.
